[release] update changelog (#1862)
ginkgo-project/ginkgo: CHANGELOG.md

Please visit our wiki [Changelog](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/wiki/Changelog) for unreleased changes.

## Version 1.10.0

The Ginkgo team is proud to announce the new Ginkgo minor release 1.10.0.
This release brings new features such as:

> - Support for bfloat16 precision. The type `gko::bloat16` can now be selected in most instances as the value type

Reviewer: hopefully not bloated 😄 
```suggestion
- Support for bfloat16 precision. The type `gko::bfloat16` can now be selected in most instances as the value type
```

  of a matrix, solver, preconditioner, etc. If the selected backend supports bfloat16 as a native type, the native type

>   is used within the kernels, otherwise an overhead might occur. The new behavior is enabled by default, but it can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is used within the kernels, otherwise they may incur a conversion overhead. The new behavior is enabled by default, but it can be
```

>   turned off during configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  turned off during CMake configuration.
```

find a solution, feel free to [open a new issue](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/issues/new/choose) or ask a question using the [github discussions](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/discussions).

Supported systems and requirements:
+ For all platforms, CMake 3.16+
+ C++17 compliant compiler
+ Linux and macOS
  + GCC: 7.0+
  + clang: 5.0+
  + Intel compiler: 2019+
  + Apple Clang: 15.0 is tested. Earlier versions might also work.
  + NVHPC: 22.7+
  + Cray Compiler: 14.0.1+
  + CUDA module: CMake 3.18+, and CUDA 11.0+ or NVHPC 22.7+, Compute Capability 5.3+
  + HIP module: CMake 3.21+, and ROCm 4.5+
  + DPC++ module: Intel oneAPI 2023.1+ with oneMKL and oneDPL. Set the CXX compiler to `dpcpp` or `icpx`.
  + MPI: standard version 3.1+, ideally GPU Aware, for best performance
+ Windows
  + MinGW: GCC 7.0+
  + Microsoft Visual Studio: VS 2019+
  + CUDA module: CUDA 11.0+, Microsoft Visual Studio
  + OpenMP module: MinGW.

### Behavior changes

+ A cmake format style has been added to uniformize formatting for CMake files. [#1755](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1755)

> + The file config for preconditioner Ic and Ilu only takes `value_type` not the `l_solver_type` or `u_solver_type` [#1811](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1811), [#1828](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1828)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ The file config for preconditioner Ic and Ilu now only takes `value_type`, not `l_solver_type` or `u_solver_type`  parameters [#1811](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1811), [#1828](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1828)
```

+ The distributed matrix now uses collective neighborhood communication if possible [#1589](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1589)

### Deprecations

> + The `experimental::EnableDistributedLinOp` has been removed, `EnableLinOp` can be used instead [#1751](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1751).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ The `experimental::EnableDistributedLinOp` mixin has been removed, `EnableLinOp` can be used instead [#1751](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1751).
```

+ The CMake parameter `GINKGO_COMPILER_FLAGS` has been superseded by `CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS`, and `GINKGO_CUDA_COMPILER_FLAGS` has been superseded by `CMAKE_CUDA_FLAGS`
+ The `std::initializer_list` overloads of matrix `create` methods and constructors are deprecated in favor of explicit `array` parameters

### Added features

+ Add a pipelined CG solver [#1824](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1824), [#1838](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1838), [#1859](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1859)
+ Add Coo Transpose/Conj-Transpose [#1816](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1816)
+ Add chebyshev iteration solver [#1289](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1289)
+ Add a two-level Schwarz preconditioner [#1431](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1431)
+ Add simplified configuration for stopping criteria [#1613](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1613)
+ Add an example to show the distributed multigrid usage [#1769](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1769)
+ Add enable half in MPI [#1759](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1759)

> + Add yaml-cpp reader for config file in extension [#1677](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1677)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Add yaml-cpp reader to parse config files in YAML format [#1677](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1677)
```

> + Add sequential and distributed L1-Jacobi [#1310](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1310), [#1806](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1806)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Add local and distributed L1-Jacobi [#1310](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1310), [#1806](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1806)
```

+ Add local-to-global index mapping [#1707](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1707)
+ Add Minres solver [#975](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/975)
+ Add `array::copy_to_host` utility function [#1835](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1835)
+ Add bfloat16 support and corresponding MPI function [#1825](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1825), [#1827](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1827)
+ Add mixed precision support for distributed matrix when the underlying matrix also support mixed precision [#1819](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1819).
+ Add distributed RowGatherer which is used by the distributed matrix to handle the communication [#1589](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1589)
+ Add complex type support for Dense transpose and Fbcsr on AMD GPUs [#1839](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1839)
+ Add OMP implementation for Merge-Path CSR [#1810](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1810)

### Improvements

+ Improve performance of factorization validation in benchmarks [#1766](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1766)

> + Allow the ValueType additionally in precondition Ic [#1811](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1811) and Ilu [#1828](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1828) and Ilu [#1828](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1828). Note. It introduces the behavior changes for config usage. Please take a look at the behavior changes section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Allow specifying a ValueType instead of a full SolverType in preconditioners Ic [#1811](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1811) and Ilu [#1828](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1828) and Ilu [#1828](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1828). Note. It introduces the behavior changes for config usage. Please take a look at the behavior changes section.
```

> + Avoid refill the constant scalar in the workspace in each apply [#1846](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1846)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Avoid reinitializing constant scalars in the workspace in each solver apply [#1846](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1846)
```

### Fixes

> + Fix the oneMKL GEMM issue on zero-sized matrix [#1756](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1756)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Fix an oneMKL GEMM issue on zero-sized matrix [#1756](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1756)
```

+ Fix error with ILU/IC generation and default algorithm on OpenMP [#1783](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1783), [#1855](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1855)
+ Avoid NaN values being propagated through multiplications with zero scalars in linear combination apply and simple BLAS operations [#1573](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1573)
+ Fix IR `move` operation [#1812](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1812)
+ Fix CUDA 12.2 null rowptr issue when setting the cusparse CSR matrix [#1843](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1843)
+ Fix COO unsupported exception on an empty matrix with 16bit precision [#1843](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1843)
+ Fix METIS detection when GKLib is linked into the METIS library [#1847](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1847)
+ Fix bfloat16 issue on CUDA before cuda 12.2 and oneAPI before oneAPI 2024.2 [#1848](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1848)

> + Fix wrong ballot result from H100 with CUDA 12.2 - 12.4 [#1849](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1849)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Work around compiler bug related to warp ballot on H100 GPUs with CUDA 12.2 - 12.4 [#1849](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1849)
```
